Regular updates & plots 1.0 update (#1382)
iterative/dvc.org: content/docs/command-reference/plots/diff.md

# plots diff

Show multiple versions of [plot metrics](/doc/command-reference/plots) by
plotting them in a single image. This allows to easily compare them.

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: dvc plots diff [-h] [-q | -v] [--targets [<path> [<path> ...]]]
                      [-t <name_or_path>] [-x <field>] [-y <field>]
                      [--no-header] [--title <text>]
                      [--x-label <text>] [--y-label <text>] [-o <path>]
                      [--show-vega]
                      [revisions [revisions ...]]

positional arguments:
  revisions             Git commits to find metrics to compare
```

## Description

This command is a way to visualize the "difference" between metrics among
experiments in the <abbr>repository</abbr> history, by plotting multiple
versions of the metrics. All plots defined in `dvc.yaml` are used by default.

> Note that unlike `dvc metrics diff`, this command does not calculate numeric
> differences between metric file values.

`revisions` are Git commit hashes, tag, or branch names. If none are specified,

> `dvc plots diff` compares targets currently present in the

Reviewer: `By default ...` ?

Author: It already says "If none are specified" in the line above 🙂

<abbr>workspace</abbr> (uncommitted changes) with their latest committed
versions (required). A single specified revision results in comparing the
workspace and that version.

> Note that any number of `revisions` can be provided, and the resulting plot

Reviewer: omit "Note that" ?

Reviewer: (it's not a Note at the moment)

Author: It's not a block quote, correct. But it's a note as in: it's a small detail we want to make sure the reader notes.

We have another 49 instances of "Note that" in docs that are not in a block quote 😬

shows all of them in a single output.

The plot style can be customized with
[plot templates](/doc/command-reference/plots#plot-templates), using the
`--template` option. To learn more about metric file formats and templates
please see `dvc plots`.

> Note that the default behavior of this command can be modified per metrics
> file with `dvc plots modify`.

## Options

- `--targets <path>` - specific metric files to visualize. These must be listed
  in a [`dvc.yaml`](/doc/user-guide/dvc-file-format) file (see the `--plots`
  option of `dvc run`).

- `-o <path>, --out <path>` - name of the generated file. By default, the output
  file name is equal to the input filename with a `.html` file extension (or
  `.json` when using `--show-vega`).

- `-t <name_or_path>, --template <name_or_path>` -
  [plot template](/doc/command-reference/plots#plot-templates) to be injected
  with data. The default template is `.dvc/plots/default.json`. See more details
  in `dvc plots`.

- `-x <field>` - field name from which the X axis data comes from. An
  auto-generated `index` field is used by default. See
  [Custom templates](/doc/command-reference/plots#custom-templates) for more

>   information on this `index` field. Column names or numbers are expected for

Reviewer: number -> indices

will it work btw if no-header is not provided?

Author: I called them column "numbers" because there's also an auto-generated `index` on the X axis for every plot and didn't want there to be confusion between these 2 but no strong opinion, I can change this if you guys insist. Note how Pawel just called it "its number" naturally 😋

Reviewer: kk, let's move forward with for now

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: dvc plots diff [-h] [-q | -v] [-t <path>]
                      [--targets [<path> [<path> ...]]] [-o <path>]
                      [-x <field>] [-y <field>] [--no-csv-header]
                      [--show-vega] [--title <text>] [--xlab <text>]

>                       [--ylab <text>] [revisions [revisions ...]]

Reviewer 2: `--xlab` -> `--x-label` and `--ylab` -> `--y-label`

Author: Just noticed these. Yes, I updated all these. Please also notice this: https://github.com/iterative/dvc/pull/3948#issuecomment-638470590 (option argument names should match this PR).

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: dvc plots diff [-h] [-q | -v] [-t <name_or_path>]
                      [--targets [<path> [<path> ...]]] [-o <path>]
                      [-x <field>] [-y <field>] [--no-csv-header]
                      [--show-vega] [--title <text>]
                      [--x-label <text>] [--y-label <text>]
                      [revisions [revisions ...]]

positional arguments:

>   revisions             Git commits to plot from/to

Reviewer: what does `/to` part mean?

Author: That you can chose the from revision and also the to revision(s).

Reviewer: hmm ... feels really weird

why just "Git commits to read metrics from to plot" is not enough?

Author: I went for `Git commits to find metrics to diff` for now (in d22c9c65). Cc @efiop

Author: UPDATE: Actually I changed `diff` for `compare` in edd0323c

```

## Description

This command is a way to visualize the difference between metrics among
experiments in the <abbr>repository</abbr> history. The target metric files

> (required) should specified with the `--targets` (`-t`) option.

Reviewer: `be specified`

Reviewer: should -> must

Author: No, actually targets are no longer required. Updated in a6132335.

I thought I had updated this before...

> metric files are versioned with Git. These should specified with the `--targets`

Reviewer: > Requires that the target metric files are versioned with Git.

is is true even for the recent DVC? cc @dmpetrov @efiop @pared

Author: I've been QAing plots today and while this text seems close to accurate to me, I improved it a little in 3a418f66.

But see also this related question: https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/pull/1382#pullrequestreview-425865736

> The `targets` should be <abbd>outputs</abbr> of one of the

Reviewer: we don't have `targets` anymore?

Reviewer: okay, I see that we have ... let's just change it to `--targets` everywhere

Author: Not sure what you mean. plots diff has --targets

Author: Oh, I guess it's not required anymore...

Reviewer: the whole paragraph is not needed that much - try to make it part of the previous sentence. The value here is the reference to the --plots? just make it in the `( ... )`

Author: One min... All the options were rearranged again in the latest core version I have. Updating ⏳

Author: > let's just change it to --targets everywhere

This part is done.

Author: > the whole paragraph is not needed that much...

OK, I moved the just of it into the **Options** section for this cmd ref. Note that a similar paragraph is repeated in show and modify, where it makes more sense (esp. in modify).

`revisions` are Git commit hashes, tag, or branch names. If none are specified,
`dvc plots diff` compares targets currently present in the
<abbr>workspace</abbr> (uncommitted changes) with their latest committed

> versions (required). A single specified revision results in plotting the

Author: This part doesn't seem accurate. I've asked about it in https://discord.com/channels/485586884165107732/563406153334128681/719342575835676733 for now...

Author: OK it seems like it \*should\* be correct, but the current 1.0 version has this bug: iterative/dvc/issues/3974. Resolving.

difference between the workspace and that version.

This command can work with target metric files that are versioned directly with

> Git, data files controlled by DVC, or untracked files in the workspace. In the

Reviewer: This contradicts the paragraph above. Also this overlaps with it - it is excessive?

Author: OK. I already rewrote this part too, per some of the pending questions I had above. It doesn't even work like that anymore.

I just double-checked there's no redundancy anymore too.

difference between the workspace and that version.

> In contrast to commands such as `git diff`, `dvc metrics diff`, and

Reviewer: we don't need in contrast to part here. Just start to the point - Any number of revisions ....

> [DVC-files](/doc/user-guide/dvc-file-format).

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand the value of this sentence. Also, it's probably not correct for the DVC 1.0

Author: Yep, it wasn't correct (same as my previous answer to https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/pull/1382#pullrequestreview-425768752). It's been updated now.

`dvc params diff`, **any number of revisions can be provided**, and the
resulting plot shows all of them in a single output.

The plot style can be customized with
[plot templates](/doc/command-reference/plots#plot-templates), using the
`--template` option. To learn more about metric file formats and templates
please see `dvc plots`.

## Options

> - `--targets [TARGETS]` (**required**) - metrics file to visualize.

Reviewer: TARGETS -> path?

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: dvc plots diff [-h] [-q | -v] [--targets [<path> [<path> ...]]]
                      [-t <name_or_path>] [-x <field>] [-y <field>]

>                       [--no-csv-header] [--title <text>]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                      [--no-header] [--title <text>]
```
per https://github.com/iterative/dvc/pull/4001

Author: Thanks for the complete and specific suggestions Ruslan 🙂 

I just grep replaced it in de9110ac though. Resolving all these.

- `-o <path>, --out <path>` - name of the generated file. By default, the output
  file name is equal to the input filename with a `.html` file extension (or
  `.json` when using `--show-vega`).

- `-t <name_or_path>, --template <name_or_path>` -
  [plot template](/doc/command-reference/plots#plot-templates) to be injected
  with data. The default template is `.dvc/plots/default.json`. See more details
  in `dvc plots`.

- `-x <field>` - field name from which the X axis data comes from. An
  auto-generated `index` field is used by default. See
  [Custom templates](/doc/command-reference/plots#custom-templates) for more
  information on this `index` field.

- `-y <field>` - field name from which the Y axis data comes from. The last
  column or field found in the `--targets` is used by default.

- `--x-label <text>` - X axis label. The X field name is the default.

- `--y-label <text>` - Y axis label. The Y field name is the default.

- `--title <text>` - plot title.

- `--show-vega` - produce a
  [Vega specification](https://vega.github.io/vega/docs/specification/) file
  instead of HTML. See `dvc plots` for more info.

> - `--no-csv-header` - lets DVC know that CSV or TSV `--targets` do not have a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `--no-header` - lets DVC know that CSV or TSV `--targets` do not have a
```

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: dvc plots diff [-h] [-q | -v] [--targets [<path> [<path> ...]]]
                      [-t <name_or_path>] [-x <field>] [-y <field>]
                      [--no-csv-header] [--title <text>]
                      [--x-label <text>] [--y-label <text>] [-o <path>]
                      [--show-vega]
                      [revisions [revisions ...]]

positional arguments:
  revisions             Git commits to plot from/to
```

## Description

> This command is a way to visualize the difference between metrics among

Reviewer: Let's write a sentence or two that it's not a "difference" - it's just multiple graphs on the same plot?

Author: Sure. If it's not a difference though, what's the point of having 2 commands for showing plots? This one could be renamed show and show deprecated, no? WDYT @efiop

Author: Noted that diff is not a real diff in 6bcf06da for now.

> p.s. this is another note I remember having written before... May be lost in some other PR and will have to be careful to merge them correctly... or maybe a bad merge somewhere un-did some work here 😢

Author: p.s. found a parallel ongoing discussion related to this in https://github.com/iterative/dvc/pull/3963#discussion_r436649649

Author: Extracted as an extra bullet in #1414

experiments in the <abbr>repository</abbr> history.

> Target metric files can be specified with the `--targets` (`-t`) option. These

Reviewer: can -> must?

Author: It's optional.

> should be <abbd>outputs</abbr> of one of the project stages (see the `--plots`

Reviewer: should -> must?

Author: Same meaning?

option of `dvc run`), listed in a
[`dvc.yaml`](/doc/user-guide/dvc-files-and-directories) file.

`revisions` are Git commit hashes, tag, or branch names. If none are specified,
`dvc plots diff` compares targets currently present in the
<abbr>workspace</abbr> (uncommitted changes) with their latest committed
versions (required). A single specified revision results in plotting the
difference between the workspace and that version.

In contrast to commands such as `git diff`, `dvc metrics diff`, and
`dvc params diff`, **any number of revisions can be provided**, and the
resulting plot shows all of them in a single output.

The plot style can be customized with
[plot templates](/doc/command-reference/plots#plot-templates), using the
`--template` option. To learn more about metric file formats and templates
please see `dvc plots`.

> Note that the default behavior of this command can be modified per metrics
> file with `dvc plots modify`.

## Options

> - `--targets <path>` (**required**) - metrics file to visualize.

Reviewer: only one is allowed?

Author: No, multiple. Fixed in 0d5f502e

- `-o <path>, --out <path>` - name of the generated file. By default, the output
  file name is equal to the input filename with a `.html` file extension (or
  `.json` when using `--show-vega`).

- `-t <name_or_path>, --template <name_or_path>` -
  [plot template](/doc/command-reference/plots#plot-templates) to be injected
  with data. The default template is `.dvc/plots/default.json`. See more details
  in `dvc plots`.

- `-x <field>` - field name from which the X axis data comes from. An
  auto-generated `index` field is used by default. See
  [Custom templates](/doc/command-reference/plots#custom-templates) for more
  information on this `index` field.

> - `-y <field>` - field name from which the Y axis data comes from. The last

Reviewer: should we mention that it can be a number as well?

Author: Sure. Done in c0ce897b

This command can work with metric files that are committed to a repository
history, data files controlled by DVC, or any other file in the workspace. In
the case of DVC-tracked `targets`, the `revisions` are used to find the
corresponding [DVC-files](/doc/user-guide/dvc-file-format).

## Options

- `--targets [TARGETS]` (**required**) - metrics file to visualize.

- `-t <path>, --template <path>` -
  [plot template](/doc/command-reference/plots#plot-templates) to be injected
  with data. The default template is `.dvc/plots/default.json`. See more details
  in `dvc plots`.

- `-o <path>, --out <path>` - name of the generated file. By default, the output
  file name is equal to the input filename with additional `.html` suffix or
  `.json` suffix for `--show-vega` mode.

- `-x <field>` - field name for X axis. An auto-generated `index` field is used
  by default.

- `-y <field>` - field name for Y axis. The last column or field found in the
  `targets` is used by default.

> - `--xlab <text>` - X axis title. The X field name is the default title.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `--x-label <text>` - X axis label. The X field name is used as default.
```

> - `--ylab <text>` - Y axis title. The Y field name is the default title.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `--y-label <text>` - Y axis label. The Y field name is used as default.
```

## Options

> - `--targets <path>` - metric files to visualize. Shows all plots by default.

Reviewer: `Shows all plots by default.` - Reads data from all plot files defined in `dvc.yaml` by default.

Author: I did add this info recently but to the command descriptions. See 91699677

I think that's better, no?
